Honors English – Shakespeare’s Genres (ENGL 325H), Final Essay
Daniel Roy Barman
Professor: Dr. Anthony J. Caschetta

The Shakespearean Dramatic Plot Pentazoid
All of Shakespeare’s plays follow a pattern from the rupture of order in the beginning to its resolution at the end. 
Generally, in the first act, the main characters of the play are introduced and the plot is established. The first act also introduces the characters’ main conflict – the rupture of order. In the second act, characters take steps to solve their problems. Throughout this act, the plot advances towards the climax in the third act. The third act is the pivotal point where a reversal of the fortunes of the characters takes place, and it is usually accompanied by recognition. The fourth act is where the unknown details about the plot twist are introduced and wrapped up, and the act leads to the conclusion. In act five (the last act), justice is served and a cosmic dance takes place.
In the first act of King Lear, almost all the important characters- Lear, Cordelia, Gonerill, Regan, Kent, Gloucester, Edmund, Edgar, Albany and Oswald - are introduced. Also, order is ruptured when Lear’s decision to retire and divide his kingdom among his daughters leads to the banishment of Cordelia, his only loyal daughter, and Kent, one of his few loyal servants, and the rise to power of Gonerill and Regan, due to Lear’s poor decision. How Gonerill treats Lear in the fourth scene of the first act makes it evident that Lear’s decision to yield his crown to his two eldest daughters had been a mistake. Lear realizes his mistake and says the following to Regan.
O most small fault,
How ugly didst thou in Cordelia show!
Which, like an engine, wrenched my frame of nature
From the fixed place, drew from heart all love,
And added to the gall. O Lear, Lear, Lear!  (I.iv.263-267)

Here, he says that Gonerill’s flattery made Cordelia look “ugly” and replaced Lear’s love for her with hate. After Lear’s departure, Gonerill expresses her disapproval of Albany’s stance in the dispute between her and Lear, and says that his “milky gentleness” (I.iv.338) and “harmful mildness” (I.iv.341) are a result of his deficiency of wisdom. In response to Gonerill, Albany foreshadows her fall with the following words.
How far your eyes may pierce I cannot tell;
Striving to better, oft we mar what's well.  (I.iv.342-343)

The order is further ruptured when Edmund, Gloucester’s illegitimate son, decides to take Gloucester’s property by wit, if not by blood and turns Gloucester against his brother, Edgar.  This happens in the second scene of the first act when he arouses Gloucester’s curiosity in a letter by making a show of hiding it when Gloucester enters. It is later revealed that the letter was from Edmund to Edgar, inviting him to take part in a conspiracy against Gloucester’s life and acquire half of his fortune. Gloucester believes Edmund without hesitation and becomes filled with rage against Edgar. He says the following, referring to Edgar.
O villain, villain! His very opinion in the
letter! Abhorred villain! Unnatural, detested, brutish
villain! worse than brutish! Go, sirrah, seek him; I'll
apprehend him. Abominable villain! Where is he? (I.ii.76-79)

Thus, two interweaving plots – the plot involving Lear, Kent, Gonerill and Regan, and the plot involving Gloucester, Edmund and Edgar, are introduced.
Plots introduced in the first act advance in the second. Edmund continues his quest to turn Gloucester against Edgar. He tells Edgar to flee, and when he hears Gloucester approaching, he draws his sword and pretends to exchange blows with Edgar. After Edgar departs, Edmund cuts his arm and lies to Gloucester and Albany; he tells them that Edgar tried to kill him for refusing to join the conspiracy against Gloucester’s life.
Edgar and Kent continue sporting their disguises, Edgar because he wants to escape his father’s wrath, and Kent because Lear banished him, but he remains loyal to Lear and watches over him.
Lear’s daughters continue treating Lear cruelly. Lear complains to Regan about Gonerill, but receives no better treatment from her. Regan says she will allow only 25 of Lear’s knights to stay with him. Lear turns back to Gonerill and says that he will agree to her condition of only him having 50 knights stay with him, but Gonerill has changed her mind and says that she will not allow him 50 servants. Finally, both Lear’s eldest daughters decide not to allow Lear any servants. A deep chasm opens between Lear and his daughters; with his heart filled with grief, Lear walks out into the rain.
The plot reaches the climax in the third act. Lear, mistreated by both his daughters, experiences recognition and realizes that he had made a mistake. Lear hardly notices the storm because of the unrest that his cruel daughters have in his mind and he says the following to Kent, when Kent presses him to take shelter.
Thou think'st 'tis much that this contentious storm
Invades us to the skin; so 'tis to thee.
But where the greater malady is fixed,
The lesser is scarce felt. Thou'dst shun a bear;
But if thy flight lay toward the roaring sea
Thou'dst meet the bear i'the mouth. When the mind's free
The body's delicate; this tempest in my mind
Doth from my senses take all feeling else
Save what beats there. – Filial ingratitude!  (III.iv.6-14)
Here, Lear says that all he can think of is his daughters’ ingratitude, which is a malady greater than the storm, which is the reason why the storm doesn’t bother him. However, when the mind is free of worries, the body is sensitive. Also, the physical storm represents the tempest in Lear’s mind, which causes him to begin losing sanity.
A change that is apparent in Lear in this act is his newborn sympathy for other people. This is evident when Edgar, disguised as ‘Poor Tom’, enters, cold and almost naked, and Lear tears off his clothes.
Furthermore, Gloucester confides in Edmund, telling him of the letter he had received which spoke of a French army having landed at Devon, and says that he would lead the king there. However, Edmund betrays Gloucester to Cornwall. Cornwall gets Gloucester captured and plucks out his eyes; and when Gloucester calls for Edmund’s help, Regan reveals Edmund’s villainy to Gloucester and says that it was Edmund who betrayed him. Gloucester experiences a moment of recognition, and says the following.
O my follies! Then Edgar was abused.
Kind gods, forgive me that and prosper him. (III.vii.90-91)
Gloucester realizes that Edgar was innocent and that he had wronged his son. It is ironic that only after Gloucester is blinded, he sees the truth.
Thus, recognition in this scene changes Lear’s and Gloucester’s attitudes – Lear’s attitude towards other people, and Gloucester’s attitude towards his sons.
The falling action begins in the fourth act as the play moves to its conclusion. Edgar, still disguised as poor Tom gets reunited with his blinded father, but chooses to keep his identity concealed from him. 
Matters start getting bad for Gonerill and Regan too. After Albany criticizes Gonerill’s monstrosity, she realizes that he is not her ally, and calls him a “Milk-livered man”(IV.ii.50). Regan’s husband, Cornwall, dies, which is good news for Gonerill, because it makes Regan less powerful, but also bad news because, being a widow, she is now more open to an affair with Edmund, whom Gonerill fancies. Gonerill says the following to herself when a messenger brings news of Cornwall’s death.
One way I like this well.
But being widow, and my Gloucester with her,
May all the building in my fancy pluck
Upon my hateful life. (IV.ii.83-86)
 This shows the lack of unity between the sisters.
Albany turns against evil and resolves to avenge Gloucester. He says the following to himself.
Gloucester, I live
To thank thee for the love thou show'dst the King
And to revenge thine eyes. (IV.ii.94-96)
Lear is reunited with Kent and Cordelia and they reconcile. The same scene presents us with another reconciliation – that between Lear and Kent.
These events appear to mark the start of the resolution of conflicts and lead to the conclusion in act 5.
The resolution of conflicts takes place in the fifth act. Albany decides to fight alongside Gonerill and Regan’s forces, and repel the foreign invasion. However, he receives a letter from Edgar, disguised as a peasant, which he took from Oswald’s body. The letter tells of a conspiracy between Gonerill and Edmund to kill Albany. This leads to Albany accusing Edmund of treason, and Edgar fighting Edmund, as Albany’s Champion. Edgar defeats Edmund in combat, reveals his identity, and announces Gloucester’s death. This marks the conclusion of the Edmund – Edgar – Gloucester plot.
Gonerill poisons Regan and stabs herself to death. Cordelia, who had been imprisoned and sentenced to be executed by Edmund’s orders, is hanged before a messenger, sent by Edmund can stop it from happening. Lear dies of grief, holding Cordelia’s corpse in his arms. This concludes the plot involving Lear and his three daughters. 
Kent’s and Edgar’s titles are restored, and the responsibility to restore peace in the kingdom falls into Edgar’s hands. 
Thus, justice is brought about and a cosmic dance is reached.

Shakespeare’s comedies follow a similar pattern. The difference between the pattern in a tragedy and that in a comedy is that there is only one conclusion in a tragedy, unlike a comedy where there may be more than one conclusion, and more than one cosmic dance.

In the first act of The Merchant of Venice, all the important characters – Antonio, Bassanio, Portia, Shylock, Lorenzo, Gratiano and Nerissa are introduced. 
In this act, Bassanio approaches his friend, Antonio, to ask him for money to court Portia, a wealthy heiress, and hold his own against other worthy suitors. He says to Antonio the following.

In Belmont is a lady richly left,
And she is fair, and, fairer than that word,
Of wondrous virtues. Sometimes from her eyes
I did receive fair speechless messages.
Her name is Portia, nothing undervalued
To Cato's daughter, Brutus' Portia;
Nor is the wide world ignorant of her worth,
For the four winds blow in from every coast
Renowned suitors, and her sunny locks
Hang on her temples like a golden fleece,
Which makes her seat of Belmont Colchos' strond,
And many Jasons come in quest of her.
O my Antonio, had I but the means
To hold a rival place with one of them,
I have a mind presages me such thrift
That I should questionless be fortunate. (I.i.161-176)

Antonio is very magnanimous towards Bassanio, whom he dearly loves, so he tells Bassanio that his money is bound to his ships which are currently at sea, but he urges Bassanio go ahead with his venture of courting Portia, saying that he will use his reputation in Venice to procure a loan for Bassanio.
Further in the first act, Portia is introduced, and so is the scheme her dead father has whipped up to find her a husband. Portia and her attendant, Nerissa, talk about several suitors that have come seeking Portia’s hand, and Portia finds faults with each suitor. Nerissa brings up Bassanio in their conversation and Portia says that he indeed is worthy of praise.
In the third scene of the first act, Shylock, the play’s blocking character, appears on the stage. Antonio and Bassanio approach him for a loan, and his dislike for Bassanio is revealed. He proposes a deal, according to which, if Antonio does not pay back the loan in three months, Shylock would be entitled to one pound of Antonio’s flesh. Antonio, ignoring Bassanio’s reluctance and commenting on Shylock’s apparent kindness, agrees. He says the following in reference to Shylock.
 Hie thee, gentle Jew.
The Hebrew will turn Christian; he grows kind. (I.iii.174-175)


Thus, the rupture of order takes place– Antonio is bound by an agreement, the only way out of which is the safe return of his trading ships, which is uncertain. Also, a second plot, Bassanio’s quest for Portia’s hand in marriage, is introduced. The two plots intertwine, and merge at the end.
The second act is an act of rising action. Here, the plots advance. The princes of Morocco and Arragon try to win Portia’s hand in marriage, but they choose the gold and silver caskets respectively and fail. Launcelot Gobbo runs away from his master, Shylock, after a brief battle between his conscience and loyalty for his master, and the reluctance to work for a jew, whom he refers to as “a kind of devil”. He asks Bassanio for a job, and gets it. Lorenzo and Jessica plan to elope with the help of Solanio and Salerio. In the end on the second act, a messenger brings news to Portia of Bassanio’s arrival.
In this act, plots introduced in the first act thicken and advance, and lesser protagonists are introduced.
In act three, a reversal of fortunes takes place. Fortuna’s wheel turns on Antonio, who had been optimistic about his ships’ return. This is first observed when Salerio brings Solanio news of a rumor of one of Antonio’s ships laden with rich cargo got wrecked on narrow seas. Shylock is in a rage about his daughter having run away with a significant amount of his money and his jewels, but is instantly cheered up, when his friend, Tubal, conveys to him the rumors of Antonio’s sunken ship. His joy is evident from the following excerpts.
I thank God, I thank God! Is it true? Is it true? (III.i.93)

I thank thee, good Tubal. Good news, good
news! Ha, ha! Heard in Genoa? (III.i.96-97)

Meanwhile, Bassanio chooses the right casket and succeeds in winning Portia’s hand in marriage. Gratiano and Nerissa also announce their love for each other and their desire to be married. Thus, the first conclusion is reached, with the union of two pairs of lovers. However, their celebration is interrupted by the entry of Lorenzo, Jessica, and Salerio, who gives Bassanio a letter from Antonio, in which Antonio says that his foreign trading ventured have failed because not one of his ships escaped the dreadful touch “Of merchant marring rocks” (III.ii.27). Jessica says that she heard Shylock say that he would rather have Antonio’s flesh than twenty times the amount Antonio owes him. Bassanio leaves to Antonio’s aid.
Antonio and Solanio plead with shylock to spare Antonio, however Shylock, who is sure that he will have his way in the end, is unwilling to concede. Portia and Nerissa plan to dress as men, Portia as a lawyer and Nerissa as her assistant, and save Antonio.
Thus, the third act is a turning point of the play and is a beginning of a series of events the protagonist must experience before his story is resolved.
In the fourth act, the events leading to the conclusion continue. Antonio and Shylock appear in court before the duke of Venice. The duke sympathizes with Antonio and requests Shylock to drop his charges, but he agrees that by law, Shylock is legally entitled to a pound of Antonio’s flesh. 
A breakthrough occurs when Nerissa arrives, dressed as a lawyer’s clerk and presents the duke with a letter from the lawyer Bellario, who was supposed to resolve the dispute. The letter says that Bellario is unable to be present at court due to sickness, but he sent in his place a young lawyer, Balthasar, whose wisdom by far surpasses his age. Portia enters, dressed as Balthasar, and agrees too, that Shylock is entitled to a pound of flesh, and Shylock gleefully showers her with praise, but his birth is cut short when Portis says that the contract does not allow him to spill any blood, and if, while extracting a pound of flesh from Antonio, he spills even a drop of Christian blood, his property would be confiscated by the state of Venice. Furthermore, Shylock is accused of attempted murder on Antonio, and, by Venetian law, one half of his goods can be seized by the state, the other half given to Antonio, and his crime is worthy of a death sentence. But the duke only seizes half of Shylock’s fortune and spares his life to show him the difference between their spirits, and Antonio allows him to retain his half of the fortune on the condition that he bequeath it to Jessica and Lorenzo.
Thus, with Antonio’s victory in the dispute, the second conclusion is reached and a cosmic dance takes place.
Bassanio offers the lawyer who saved Antonio a tribute. Portia yields to his insistence and asks for his gloves and his ring. Bassanio readily gives up his gloves, but says that the ring is a trifle, and he would rather not shame the lawyer with such a gift. However, after persistence from Portia, and a request from Antonio, Bassanio surrenders the ring. Nerissa, who is dressed as Balthasar’s clerk, does the same to Lorenzo and procures his ring.
The fifth (final) act ties up all the loose ends in the story. When Antonio, Bassanio and Lorenzo return to Portia’s estate, Portia and Nerissa confront their fiancés about the rings and they swear they had given them away to the lawyer and his clerk respectively, but Portia and Nerissa continue to rebuke the lack of significance Bassanio and Lorenzo attach to gifts from the women. Portia says the following to Bassanio. 
You were to blame – I must be plain with you –
To part so slightly with your wife's first gift,
A thing stuck on with oaths upon your finger
And so riveted with faith unto your flesh.
I gave my love a ring, and made him swear
Never to part with it; and here he stands.
I dare be sworn for him he would not leave it
Nor pluck it from his finger for the wealth
That the world masters. Now in faith, Gratiano,
You give your wife too unkind a cause of grief.
An 'twere to me, I should be mad at it. (V.i.166-176)

They keep up the act for a while longer before revealing the true identity of the Balthasar and his clerk, and returning the rings to Bassanio and Lorenzo. 
Moreover, Antonio receives news that several of his ships have safely returned to Venice. This is observed when he says the following to Portia.

Sweet lady, you have given me life and living,
For here I read for certain that my ships
Are safely come to road. (V.i.286-288)
Thus, everything is resolved and the final cosmic dance takes place.
The structure of plots in Shakespeare’s plays can be compared to the shape of a pentazoid. The plot escalates between the first and second act, when characters and their conflicts are introduced. The escalation continues, and the plot thickens, from the second act to the third act, but it is less steep because the conflicts grow till the climax in the third act is reached. Fortunes reverse in the third act, and the plot starts descending towards the conclusion. Between the third and the fourth acts, the plot advances to the conclusion. The descent to the conclusion steepens between the fourth and fifth acts because all loose ends are tied up and cosmic dances take place.
